**CS 241, Lecture 2 - Characters and Machine Language**

Characters
==========

-   ASCII:

    -   0-31: control

    -   48-57: 0-9

    -   65-90: A-Z

    -   97-122: a-z

    -   $|$A-a$| =$ 32

Bitwise Operations
==================

-   In C, we have bitwise operations.

-   `~` (not) flips all bits.

-   `&` (and) will give the AND of two binary strings.

-   `|` (or) will give the OR of two binary strings.

-   `^` (xor) will give the XOR of two binary strings.

-   `>>` and `<<` (right and left shift, respectively) will do a logical
    shift right and left by the given integer, respectively. A left
    shift is equal to multiplying by 2.

    -   Logical shift: Always shift zeroes for both left and right.

    -   Arithmetic shift: If left, shift zero. If right, shift MSB.

    -   We get undefined behaviour if we right shift a signed integer.

    -   For our case, we will ALWAYS use logical shifts!

Instructions
============

-   Programs reside in the same place on the data they operate on - they
    are also data (von Neumann architecture).

-   Thus, we cannot really distinguish, without more information,
    whether a data is a program (set of instructions) or if it just
    data!

-   For this course, we will work with 32-bit MIPS.

-   Our MIPS CPU contains 32 registers, \$0, \... ,\$31, and hi, lo.

-   Our control unit contains our PC and instruction register (IR).

-   We have two memory registers - memory data register (MDR) and memory
    address register (MAR).

-   We also have an ALU.

-   We use a bus to transfer data from CPU to memory.

-   Wew have a few types of memory that we use in computers (from
    fastest to slowest):

    -   CPU/registers

    -   L1 cache (SRAM)

    -   L2 cache (SRAM)

    -   RAM (DRAM)

    -   disk

    -   network memory

-   Each register can be represented in 5 bits.

-   The registers we get to control with MIPS are our 32 registers (and
    hi and lo). Note some registers are special and we do not need to
    touch:

    -   \$0 is ALWAYS 0

    -   \$31 is used for return addresses

    -   \$30 is our stack pointer

    -   \$29 are frame pointers

-   Note that in most MIPS standards, \$29 and \$30's roles are
    reversed. Why? Who knows.

-   MIPS takes instructions loaded from RAM and executes them.

-   To solve our earlier problem with confusing data and programs, we
    will state that anything with memory address 0 in RAM is an
    instruction.

-   After we execute an instruction, we go to the NEXT instruction
    labelled by our PC.

-   We use a program called a loader to put our program into memory, and
    then sets the PC to be the first address.

-   CPUs basically follow a fetch-execute cycle, in which the following
    occurs:

    ``` {.numberLines mathescape="" numbers="left"}
    PC = 0
    while true do
        IR = MEM[PC]
        PC += 4
        Decode and execute instruction in IR
    end while
    ```

-   Eventually some instruction will break out of the infinite loop.

Adding, lis, and returning
==========================

-   Let us write an example program that takes in registers \$8 and \$9
    and stores it in \$3:

    ``` {.numberLines mathescape="" numbers="left" breaklines="true"}
    ; add $\$$3 $\$$8 $\$$9 is what we want - binary equiv. is 00011, 01000, 01001, respectively.
    ; we see that our binary equivalent is 0000 00ss ssst tttt dddd d000 0010 0000
    ; now let us insert our value, and get 0000 0001 0000 1001 0001 1000 0010 0000
    ; so we thus reduce this to a 32-bit word in hexadecimal: 0x01091820
    .word 0x01091820
    .word 0x03e00008 ; jr $\$$31, return
    ```

-   Note we HAVE to jump to register \$31 to end our program - we do so
    with `jr $\$$31`.

-   But this assumes you had values **in** the register - how do we put
    immediate values in registers? We use the `lis $\$$d` MIPS command.

-   Note that `lis` is **non-standard**, normally we would use `addi` to
    add immediate values.

-   This will place the next word, immediately after, into register \$d.
    It will increment the PC by 4 and skip the next line as it is
    (usually) NOT an instruction.

-   Note this value is a two's complement integer.

-   Let us write a MIPS program that adds 11 and 13:

    ``` {.numberLines mathescape="" numbers="left"}
    .word 0x00000814 ; lis $\$$1
    .word 0x0000000b ; ivalue 11
    .word 0x00001014 ; lis $\$$2
    .word 0x0000000d ; ivalue 13
    .word 0x00221820 ; add $\$$1 and $\$$2, store in $\$$3
    .word 0x03e00008 ; jr $\$$31
    ```

Multiplication and Division
===========================

-   We get a problem with multiplying and division - we may need more
    space when multiplying (ie: $2^{30} \times 2^{30} = 2^{60}$), and
    when dividing, we want the quotient and remainder!

-   For multiplication, we COMBINE the hi and lo registers to get a
    64-bit register. The most significant word is placed in hi, and
    least significant word in lo (most sig word is largest 4 bytes).

-   For division, we put the quotient `$\$$s $\div$ $\$$t` in lo and the
    remainder `$\$$s % $\$$t` in hi.

-   To access data from hi and lo, we use the `mfhi $\$$d` and
    `mflo $\$$d` instructions to move from the hi/lo register to the
    register we state.
